Great,
now that our environment is set up and running and we are oriented with Cloud9,
we can start writing code.
For our first example,
we are going to write a quick Hello World program
within Cloud9 using Node JavaScript.
If you're unfamiliar with JavaScript, don't worry,
I'll be keeping everything very simple within this course,
since this course is oriented to Cloud9,
not JavaScript.
Our steps for creating an application in Cloud9 are as follows.
First, we will create a new file called index.js that will contain our code.
Then,
we will write code in JavaScript to create a variable and output
that variable to say "Hello world!" to the console.
Next,
we will set a breakpoint so that we can pause our program's execution
and debug line by line while viewing local variables.
And lastly,
we will create a run configuration so that we can execute and
debug our code directly in the Cloud9 console.
Let's get to it.
The first thing we're going to do is create a new
file in Cloud9 to write code in.
We will start by selecting the File drop‑down in our menu bar. From here, we
will select New From Template to create a new file from one of Cloud9's
templates of its supporting programming languages.
Let's then select JavaScript to create an empty JavaScript file.
Now our code editor window has an empty JavaScript file for us to code
in. I'm going to write a JavaScript variable called helloWorldString
and assign it the value of Hello Cloud9.
Then, I'm going to use the console.log JavaScript function to
print the helloWorldString variable to the JavaScript console.
Directly left of our code, we can see the line numbers for each
line of code we write.
This section of the development environment is called the gutter and can be
used to set breakpoints and provide information to developers.
We can see an information icon is present in line 3 of our gutter.
If we hover over it,
we can see that it's indicating to us that our statement on
this line is missing a trailing semicolon.
Once we add a semicolon, we can see that the message immediately goes away.
These informative notifications are a great benefit provided by
coding in Cloud9, as they help developers write quality code and
prevent bugs from entering the code base.
All right, now our code is ready to go, so let's save this file.
Let's use our menu bar again and select File and then Save. When prompted,
I'm going to rename our file from untitled to index.js, since that is the
default file name executed by JavaScript programs.
Now we can see in our environment file system on the left‑hand side that
index.js has now been saved in the root folder of our workspace.
We are ready to run our program, so let's press the Run
button. In our terminal window, we can see that Hello
Cloud9 was successfully outputted, meaning that our code executed properly.
Notice that since we used a Javascript code template when creating this
file and saved the file as index.js that we did not have to create any run
configurations for our code to execute properly. Cloud9 was able to
automatically understand the programming language and file that we wanted
to execute and did so properly.
Well, now that we know how to run a program in Cloud9,
let's try debugging. In our gutter,
we can click to the left of a line number to place a breakpoint.
As you can see,
breakpoints are visually represented with red
circles. With our breakpoint set up, let's run our code by pressing Run,
just like we did last time.
We can see that our code has paused execution and has highlighted the second
line to indicate it is paused on this line number within the debugging process.
On the right‑hand side, our debugging window has expanded slightly to indicate
we are in a debugging session. So let's drag this over a bit so we can get a
better view of what's going on here.
Our debugging window has a few useful options for us.
Foremost, at the top, it has the execution commands.
These commands can be used to continue execution of the program.
Here we can specify to run a single line of code,
jump over a function call,
jump into a function call, or even continue execution indefinitely
until the program terminates or another breakpoint is set. Towards
the bottom of our debugging window, we have a variables area that
displays variables within our program and their current values for
easy reference.
In the variable section, we can already view the
helloWorldString variable is placed here.
Currently, this variable has an undefined value,
since our program is paused on the exact line of code that assigns its value. In
our debug window, we can also view a list of all breakpoints that we have
defined in our application and the current call stack.
You might be wondering why it's useful to have our call
stack and breakpoints listed here,
since it's easily visible in our editor window.
Well, since we're only coding with a single file,
these sections aren't particularly helpful.
However, when developing large applications with multiple files,
these sections can be very helpful to have a better
understanding of your running environment.
Debugging is one of the most important features of Cloud9. So let
me give a quick rundown of the options you have available in the
debugging window just one more time.
You can view local variables and their current values.
You can view the call stack to see all of the functions in your
application that have already been called.
You can type quick expressions to execute and view their outputted values.
You can view a list of all breakpoints you currently have set up
in your application. And you can use the debugging commands to
step through your code, over or into functions, and to continue
execution indefinitely.
Our code is still paused on line 2, so let's press the Step Over
command to continue our code execution to the next line.
We can see that the yellow highlighted visual indicator
shows that our code is now paused on line 3.
If we take a quick peek at our variable section in our debugging window,
we can see that the helloWorldString variable now has the value Hello Cloud9
assigned to it. Also, in Cloud9 during debugging sessions,
you can quickly hover over variables to view their current values.
So if we hover over our helloWorldString variable,
we can see its current value in the Cloud9 visual pop‑up.
Now let's select the Play button to continue our code execution indefinitely.
You can see our program has terminated, and our debugging window is no
longer visual, and our variable was again printed into the console.
Although this example was quite simple, we've covered a lot of Cloud9's
key functionalities and features,
and you can now learn how to leverage Cloud9 to build more complex and enterprise systems in the cloud.